---
layout: post
title: "Beyoncé Within and Without the Sonic Episteme"
---

For some reason I couldn't stop thinking about Elon Musk and Grimes while reading Robin James' *The Sonic Episteme*. The twisted pair, infamous for their adherence to bizarro AI conspiracy theories and questionable child naming practices, have managed to develop a cult following even while existing as punchlines on the internet. Other than the fact that Grimes is an electronic artist, there's really no reason they should've kept popping into my mind. So why did they? 

In *The Sonic Episteme*, Robin James develops a framework for understanding the perpetuation of a neoliberal, biopolitical agenda, one which upholds white supremacist patriarchy, through the medium of sound. James defines the "neoliberal episteme" as the quantitative processes of reducing the human condition through probabilistic statistics (2). Existing as the natural counterpoint, James argues there is the "sonic episteme." Functioning as "two sides of the same coin," the sonic episteme does qualitatively what the neoliberal episteme does quantitatively. 

So what exactly *is* the sonic episteme? For James, the sonic episteme translates to a body of thought aimed at evaluating sound, one which seeks to subvert political baggage yet perpetuates the terms of white supremacist patriarchy. It does this through a flattening of variation, masked in the language of inclusivity, which refuses to address the true power dynamics at play. To crassly summarize: the sonic episteme is scholarly performative wokeness. Like Eidsheim's *Race of Sound*, *The Sonic Episteme* is a call to reframe the way we talk about and evaluate sound, pressing us to develop the language and tools to discuss non-white artistry and its relationship to culture and politics. James' project is in many ways to aggregate examples of counter-scholarship, bringing them together under her framework of "phonographies."

As I found myself thinking through the sonic episteme, I wanted to concretize James' definition within the framework of our current cultural experience. I wanted an example of the sonic episteme at play beyond the bounds of scholarly dialogue. And somehow Musk and Grimes kept popping up out of the ether as the perfect spokesmen for neoliberal performative wokeness. For a certain set of California tech junkie, Musk and Grimes represent a pathway for wealthy liberalism. Musk's commercialization of the electric car, the ideal vector for performing ecological consciousness. Grimes' fetishization and fear of AI, and her dalliance with dehumanized music. It sort of fits.

On the counter side of the sonic episteme, James had several cultural examples to highlight. I found myself most interested in the way Beyoncé became a recurring source of James' phonographies in practice. Many have noted *Lemonade*'s role in bringing black feminist thought to a mainstream audience. What has interested me about the phenomena of Beyoncé, particularly in the four years since *Lemonade*'s release, is not the way Beyoncé disseminates black feminist thought, but the way she operationalizes and commercializes it. In the context of the sonic episteme, the cult of Beyoncé feels almost equally divided between subverting the neoliberal biopolitical agenda that James outlines, and upholding it. I'm thinking of the way Beyoncé is deployed in certain spaces as a catch-all for wokeness, one which feels very similar to the black studies reading lists heavily circulated by white celebrities on instagram in the weeks following George Floyd's murder this summer. The ease with which capital circulates from Beyoncé's deployment of black feminism can't help but remind me just a little of Elon Musk and the electric car. 

How do we culturally confront our expectations of black female voices as necessarily radical? Is Beyoncé sonically radical, or do we want her to be so that we can lace her in a lineage with other black female radical singers like Holiday or Simone? How might a persona like Beyoncé's function culturally as a "both/and," serving to subvert expectations of the black female, promote radical black feminist ideas, but also participate in a performative commercialization of these ideals? 

### Works Read

- James, Robin. *The Sonic Episteme: Acoustic Resonance, Neoliberalism, and Biopolitics.* Duke University Press, 2019.