---
layout: post
title: "Odetta and Dylan"
---

> "One Grain of Sand captures the social justice project that was Odetta's voice."  — Matthew Frye Jacobson, *Odetta's One Grain of Sand*

Odetta is often spoken of as the "voice of the Civil Rights Movement," a nod to her role as activists and singer. In his 33 1/3 piece on Odetta's *One Grain of Sand*, Matthew Frye Jacobson writes of "the social justice project that was Odetta's voice," tagging her vocality as political, but also alluding to a literal tangibility of her vocalization as a "project," or something which we might be able to wrap our minds (if not our hands) around (1). Reflecting on Odetta's role as the "voice of the Civil Rights Movement," it strikes me that in many ways this tag is quite literal, as much as figurative: it is not only Odetta's role as an activist and leader, but her actual sound which is being identified as speaking for a whole social movement. In fact, I would argue, it is perhaps even more literal than figurative. 

I'm reminded of Dylan, who similarly to Odetta, is often tagged as being the "voice of a generation." But when we talk about Bob Dylan as a "voice of a generation," I think we can safely agree that no one is really arguing his literal voice—infamous for its unique character to say the least—is functioning as an archetype for a whole generation. Calling Dylan the "voice of a generation" is most often a reference to his songwriting, the content of his words and the impact they have evoked, rather than the literal timbre or tonality of his delivery. 

So I'd like to take a minute to think about Dylan and Odetta's voices, both literally and figuratively, and how these two aspects of consideration feed into each other. 

Odetta was a classically trained, operatic singer. Her voice is deep, resonant, and powerfully evocative. She evicts control over her voice as her instrument. In contrast, Dylan's voice is thin, often nasal, and famously scraggly. Where Odetta lifts up a lyric, Dylan is often fighting with it. 

In *Segregating Sound*, Karl Hagstrom Miller writes about the lineage of American folk music in minstrelsy: "Minstrelsy taught that authenticity was performative" (5). He argues that blackface defined what listeners defined as genuine, allowing authenticity to be defined by collective agreement of truth. Sitting in this lineage, folk became another modality for whiteness to mediate "authentic" blackness. 

So what does it mean to think about a performer like Odetta within this lineage? Miller writes of the relationship between early black folk/blues singer Huddie Ledbetter and white folk archivist John Lomax, highlighting their (almost) mutual exploitation and the way Ledbetter monetized his work with Lomax. But Odetta is strategically advancing a social movement. She is participating and pushing in a "social justice project." What does it mean to consider this project in a lineage of minstrelsy? 

I would argue that we can read Odetta's role in the folk lineage of minstrelsy as actively reframing received ideas of authenticity. Her background, for example, as a classically trained singer, which is at the center of Odetta's iconic sound, rebutts the archetypical perception of black folksong. When she sings "Cotton Fields" we are not asked to sonically imagine Odetta singing in a literal cotton field, the way perhaps we might when listening to Ledbetter's version, but instead experience Odetta as singing of and to a projection of the black experience, pulling it into a contemporary framework that asks listeners to confront what they are hearing in the now. She reclaims folksong as a black space, one which is not beholden to or assume that a black performer has to sound like they are working in a cotton field while singing. Her authenticity is taken out of the realm of personal experience. 

On reaching New York, the young white Jewish boy Robert Zimmerman from Duluth, Minnesota, promptly adopted the name Bob Dylan and spent much of the early parts of his career deliberately obscuring his personal history. Similar to Odetta, Dylan worked to build his own brand of personal authenticity, but unlike Odetta, his was entirely based on personal experience. He wanted listeners to believe his folk songs came from a depth of experience, even while simultaneously asking us to question what that experience might need to be. Returning to Miller, we can understand Dylan's early folk days as part of the lineage of reading "authenticity as performative" that is the legacy of minstrelsy. 

The sonic contrast between Dylan and Odetta is most apparent in Odetta's covers of Dylan's folksongs. For example, in "Blowin' in the Wind" Dylan sings "Yes, ’n’ how many years can some people exist / Before they’re allowed to be free?" When Odetta covers the song on *Odetta Sings Dylan*, she removes the word "some" before people, singing simply "How many years can people exist." It's a subtle change, almost unnoticeable. But it adds a level of specificity that Dylan's version others. It is not "some" people for Odetta, it is black people, her people, that she is singing for and to. 

Odetta's version of "With God on Our Side" performs similar work. Dylan's version, particularly 50 plus years on, is dripping with irony. When Dylan ends each stanza "With God on Our Side," he is practically spitting sarcasm. As far as Dylan songwriting is concerned, it is one of the least subtle of his protest songs, bearing a clear anti-war message in its final line. When Odetta sings "With God on Our Side" on *Odetta Sings Dylan*, it is no less ironic, but she but she elevates the dramatic irony at play, making it less flip and more biting. She cuts Dylan's stanza about the Civil War and the stanza where Dylan flippantly sings "You'll have to decide / Whether Judas Iscariot / Had God on his side." Odetta instead returns to the first stanza, repeating "My name it means nothing / My age it means less" ending the song where it began. Pragmatically, Odetta's cuts pull the song's length down to five minutes instead of seven, but they also allow space for her vocal performance to do the political work of the song, rather than cutting lyrics alone.

### Works Read

- Miller, Karl Hagstrom. *Segregating Sound: Inventing Folk and Pop Music in the Age of Jim Crow*. Duke University Press, 2010.
- Jacobson, Matthew Frye. *Odetta's One Grain of Sand*. Bloomsbury Academic & Professional, 2019.