---
layout: post
title: "Does this really sound better on vinyl?"
---

I went to the record store this weekend. I haven't been physically in person in a record store for at least six months—possibly more, I must confess that the local D.C. shops have never spoken to me as much as my favorite haunts in my old home in Western Mass. Everyone has their nit-picky record shop preferences. Anyway, it was a beautiful Saturday, and my husband and I were on a lovely walk, so naturally I felt compelled to sort through some musty stacks of used records in a dark basement shop. Perusing the stacks, my husband pulls up a copy of Stevie Nicks' *Bella Donna* and jokingly asks if we already have a copy. We didn't. But we do now. 

Back at home, I put *Bella Donna* on—a record I purchased for really no good reason other than to call my husband's bluff (Stevie Nicks isn't even my favorite member of Fleetwood Mac). "This is better than I expected," my husband remarks. I agreed. The expectations were pretty low. "Edge of Seventeen" came on—a song played with regularity on the radio, sampled by Beyoncé, something I'd heard maybe a hundred times—and it honestly felt like hearing the song for the first time. I cranked it. It was great. Certainly better than the other ninety-nine times I've listened to it on the radio. 

But it was also exactly the same. 

Functionally nothing about "Edge of Seventeen" had changed in the slightest. But with the glow of a shared joke, the vinyl grooving along on my turntable, it *felt* like it sounded better. Many audiophiles and record lovers talk about this at length: the supposed "warmth" of vinyl that gives music a richer, more grounded, more real sound. As a proud collector of a robustly growing vinyl collection and solidly mid-level turntable, I myself have literally *bought* into the idea that there's something worth it about vinyl. 

In *Decomposed: The Political Ecology of Music*, Kyle Devine notes an important link to nostalgia as part of the current vinyl revival. He identifies a mass proliferation of more media formats and more consumption as music media linger within the cultural landscape. To compliment my 1,000 records, I have 10,000 MP3s in my iTunes library. Not all of them are duplicates, but, like many listeners, I fall prey to a pursuit of having my music available to me in as many modes possible. Devine highlights this phenomenon as one of the key facets of the modern "political ecology" of music, or the ways in which "musical culture is made and possessed, dispossessed and unmade" (18). This proliferation has an urgent ecological impact on communities and landscapes touched by PVC production or rare earth mineral mining. The climate is of course in crisis due to a myriad of industrialization and consumer pursuits. But by highlighting the long history of music's imbrication in the climate crisis and petrocapitalism and calling for a broadening of our scope of the music industry to account for the many corporate players, communities, laborers, and natural resources involved in producing musical objects, Devine tackles the notion of musical exceptionalism. He attempts to confront the preciousness of music media like the vinyl LP. 

Like Devine, Jonathan Sterne identifies an underlying current of capitalism as the root driver of music media development. In *MP3*, Sterne writes of the long history of the MP3 audio format, from its roots in telephonic systems development at the turn of the twentieth century through the listening tests which contributed to the standardization of the format as we know it today. For example, key to the development of the MP3 was the research Bell Telephone conducted on user's hearing spectrum which led the company optimizing their line bandwidth by eliminating the excess definition that user's couldn't "perceive" and instead filling that space with more calls. This process established what Sterne calls "perceptual capital." In this way, for Sterne, the history of audio formats is tightly married to the aesthetic of compression which supports corporate desires for rapid capital growth by tapping into the user's desire for universality. 

Sterne describes the development of the MP3 listening tests which aimed to perfect the format's capacity to serve a universal set of music for the universal audience. As Sterne writes, to do this, the designers sought to strip as much subjectivity out of the testing process as possible, attempting to flatten all variation save the known variables of the MP3 formats they were testing. The brought in "expert listeners," who as Sterne notes, were far from the average listener, comprised of audiophiles, engineers, and other "qualified" listeners. The flaws are obvious. Robin James defines the "sonic episteme" as a performative universality: an attempt to flatten variation such in such a way that obscures underlying inequality rather than eliminating it, supporting neoliberal biopolitics rather than subverting them. Is the MP3's positioning as a universal format, one which can sound authentic for all genres of music and people, part of this sonic episteme? The listening tests would seem to support this, but as Sterne points out, the method may be flawed, but the outcome was still successful. Now in its third decade, the MP3 continues to hold a place as a universally recognized format. 

Which brings me back to "Edge of Seventeen." Does it really sound better on vinyl or does the cultural aestheticization of vinyl as more "real" make it feel like it does? At its core, we can never really answer this question. Listening to music is always going to be a subjective act, just like looking at a painting. But like Nina Sun Eidsheim notes about the acousmatic question, or Paige McGinley identifies as a recurring thread in blueswoman narratives, listeners have been trained into evaluating music by its perceived authenticity from its performance to its format. There's an obsession in vinyl collecting these days around tracing particular record pressings, hunting for originals, or quirky re-issues. Having the album on vinyl is no longer enough, we must track down the original, and hunt down all possible variations. But as Devine notes, if you broaden the framework of what constitutes "musicology" you find this is an impossible task. You can never truly trace an LP to its origins. At a certain point the trail goes cold, most likely by the corporate players working to monetize this pursuit of the real.

### Works Read

- Devine, Kyle. *Decomposed: The Political Ecology of Music.* MIT Press, 2019.
- James, Robin. *The Sonic Episteme: Acoustic Resonance, Neoliberalism, and Biopolitics.* Duke University Press, 2019.
- Sterne, Jonathan. *MP3: The Meaning of a Format*. Duke University Press, 2012. 