---
layout: post
title: "On Queens, Authenticity, and the Blues"
---

The question of authenticity sits at the center of both Paige McGinley's *Staging the Blues* and Nina Sun Eidsheim's *Race of Sound*. Eidsheim theorizes that the act of listening for authenticity or identification propagates racialized assumptions about voice. In *Staging the Blues*, McGinley seeks to combat the widespread reliance on "realness" in evaluating and archiving the blues. McGinley traces a thread of the preoccupation around questions of authenticity from the commercialization of the blues by white producers to current scholarly histories, one which often negates black female artists' roles and agency in the lineage of the blues. To combat this narrative, McGinley works to excavate the neglected theatrical history of the blues. 

Using a performance studies lens, McGinley analyzes the artistry and theatricality of early blueswomen pioneers Ma Rainey and Bessie Smith, highlighting their innovative use of costume to build personas as stars and develop a public vision of black female glamour which actively combatted black stereotypes like the Mammy. McGinley points out that both Rainey and Smith took deliberate control of their public personas, establishing themselves as not only actresses, but stars and queens, blurring and withholding the autobiographical to build representative personas which could disseminate this new narrative of black femininity across the south. 

McGinley's account of Rainey's and Smith's performances made me think of the modern notion of the black female diva,and naturally reminded me of Aretha Franklin (like Rainey and Smith, a self-appointed Queen). Unlike contemporaries like Nina Simone, Franklin is often not tagged as overtly political in the public sphere. Songs like "Respect" and "(You Make me Feel Like) A Natural Woman" have been adopted by social movements, and Franklin herself has been no stranger to supporting black activist causes over the years, yet her main public persona is that of "diva" or "queen" not "protest singer" or "activist." Building off of McGinley's discussion of Rainey and Smith, I'm interested in listening to Franklin within their lineage, and considering her theatricality—her diva-hood—as the source of her political power. Through this lens, a song like "Dr. Feelgood (Love is a Serious Business)" off of Franklin's *I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You*, with its sexualized energy and empowerment, feels as political as "Strange Fruit" or "Mississippi Goddam" in its ability to subvert and disrupt assumptions of black femininity. 

Rainey, Smith, Holiday, Franklin: through these figures we can trace a lineage of black women disrupting the public sphere by manipulating their persona. But it doesn't seem coincidental that these women are all powerful singers—in the case of Rainey and Smith, they are actresses and entertainers, too, but the modality of disruption through song remains. Thinking back to my writing around Aunt Hester's infamous scream, Nel's suppressed vocalizations in *Sula*, and Nina Simone's "Mississippi Goddam" as sites of black female disruption, I wonder how we might pull these threads together between persona, authenticity, and vocalization? Why do we see the modality of sound, and more specifically vocalization—whether through song, scream, or silence—come up again and again as the site of key moments of black feminine radicalization or disruption?

### Works Read

- Eidsheim, Nina Sun. *The Race of Sound: Listening, Timbre, and Vocality in African American Music.* Duke University Press, 2018.
- McGinley, Paige A. *Staging the Blues: From Tent Shows to Tourism.* Duke University Press, 2014.